So, to review, we did our two to three
day process that sort of pulled all this
data off the internet.
Hopefully, you haven't crashed your home
bandwidth, or crashed anybody's bandwidth.
You don't have to do all of this.
If you're only going to do a little
bit you can play with the word stuff.
The lines aren't going to look good
with a small amount of data but
this is two to three days worth of work.
And that is a restartable process
it's kind of a spider process,
focus on restartability.
Then we ran this gmodel
which cleans the data up,
makes it much smaller,
makes it actually relational.
So we have multiple tables connected
together by foreign keys and
now we're going to talk about these
next few steps in the visualization.
So this is where the fact that this data
is all beautifully relational is going to
pay off for us.
And so we're going to start with the
gbasic.py just so we can take a look at
how the code loops through and
just treats the database as input data.
And it looks a lot like things we've been
doing all along, gbasic, right there.
It looks like the things we've been doing
all along except that we have a select at
the beginning.
So we can think of this as we're going to
make a connection to the database and
we're going to run a select.
And we're going to join between, in this
case, the messages and the senders so
that we can get the sender's name, right?
And so that's the real value here
is we're going to loop through all
the different senders in the database and
then run a count on those folks.
And from here on,
other than the fact that this
for loop is going through
each row in the cursor
and the sub zero is the message ID and
the sub one is the sender's
email address and then we're going to
have some dictionaries, right?
sendcounts = dict for dictionary to create
it with a constructor and message sub one,
which is the second thing in that
select statement is our email address.
And also note if you go back to gmodel we
had all these weird email addresses that
had strange at signs and gmane in them.
We cleaned all that up, and so
this data that we're working with is
the index.sqlite which is clean data, so
we can write really clean
loops that are simple.
We know the data's been cleaned up.
If we have to go clean it up, we go
back and re-clean the whole data up and
run gmodel again.
So we got the good email address,
it's clean.
Whatever mapping we've done,
it's all done.
And so then I'm just going to write,
sendcounts equals
sendcounts.get(sender,0), I'm adding
one to it, a histogram bucket.
Then we'll split that in the name and
email address and then name and
domain name and
we get the second piece of that.
And then we keep track
of the organizations.
And that's really not that different
than code we've been writing all along.
So we're going to do
some number of the top.
We ask for this how many?
Then we're going to sort it.
So this sort is a little bit different.
What we're going to do is sort
the sendcounts dictionary and
use, as its sort key, the get for
each of the things, the get method.
And that'll be the key upon which to sort.
And then we're going to get back a list,
and that is a list of the counts.
And so we're going to print the top
however many, going to have the key and
then counts for that key.
And then we're done.
And we're going to do the same thing for
the organizations by sorting
the organizations dictionary
by the value that's in there.
And then we're going to
print the top ten of those.
So this is pretty straightforward.
So, print gbasic.py.
Oops, print python gbasic.py.
Let's just dump the top ten.
And so you notice how instant that was,
right?
That read the whole database.
That literally read everything
in that database and
that's the beauty of having
a fully relational database.
If you remember, gmodel took eight,
ten minutes, maybe three minutes,
maybe 20 minutes, depending on
how efficient your computer is.
But this is super fast
because we did a select and
a join and that's what databases
are really good for.
So this is a situation where you use this
multistep process so that the analysis
you're going to do over and over and
over again happens really fast.
And so that's why you did those two
slower steps. You wouldn't want to do
data analysis and let it run for
three days just to get this list.
Because now if want to change the code and
get a different thing I
can just run it again.
And while I want to dump 5 this time and
then bing it's that fast, right?
So that's why you have this multi-step
process for your data.
Okay, so that is just gbasic.
Let's go ahead and take a look at
the next thing we're going to do and
that is looking for the words.
And you'll see that this
is a very similar pattern.
We're going to effectively
grab index.sqlite.
We're going to look at all the words in
the subject lines of all the messages.
So we're going to select the subject and
subject id for
messages joined on subject.
because you recall, subjects are in
their own separate database, and
then join that together.
And then we're going to have a count.
These are going to be a count of words,
not the count of whole subject because
the subject is multiple words.
We're going to pull out the text out of
the second parameter which is the actual
subject itself.
And we're going to use text translate
which is sting.punctuation, which is
effectively just taking all commas and
exclamation points and underscores.
All the punctuation is being taken out
of it, that's what this is doing.
It's effectively a multiple replace
of everything in this string.
Every character in this string
replacing it with nothing.
And we're going to throw away all the
numbers, so we're going to replace this.
We did this in an earlier
example with Romeo,
where we were getting rid of anything
like trunk punctuation numbers.
So at this point, this text variable is
the same as what was in the subject line
except no punctuation and
no numbers in it.
Now we're going to strip it,
map to lowercase because we want this
words to match whenever possible.
And then we're just going to use split.
And at that point you have subject line,
no punctuation lowercase, and
then we will do a simple
looping through the words.
We aren't going to ask for words less
than four, we just skip those and
then we're going to do
a simple count of the words.
And again, we're going to find now
using the sorted with key = counts.get,
that's basically saying don't go with the
key name itself but go with the key value.
The value for a particular key,
as the sorting thing. We still get
the keys back in this words thing.
So that's all the different keys but
now we're going to be able
to get the top hundred.
And now we're going to look for
the words in the top hundred that
have the highest and lowest count.
And so this is just looping
through all the keys the 100 most
common words and a simple high low loop.
And when we have this, this ends up being
the range of the counts which is the most
common word and the least common
words in the top 100 words.
Okay, so that's what that showing for
us on line 35.
And then what we're going to do is
we're going to produce some data.
So this one. Let me show you real
quick what it's going to run like.
So if I say python gword.py this
produces output to gword.js and
I can open in my browser.
It turns out on Macintoshes I
can just open a browser
by saying open gword.htm.
and we're making this.
And so I'm only taking a 100 words and
what I have to do is based on the count
I want the size of these words to go
from 20 point font to 80 point font
sort of relative to the size, okay?
Of the words in the subject line.
And so this is just a little
bit of kind of clever code.
I'm writing this JavaScript file,
it's going to look like this.
Which is just this has to do
with a d3.js visiualization and
it's just the rules for the you know
what size we want this thing to do
what font we want it to be
Sakai we want it to be in font 100.
Error we want it to be in font 22.
That's the output that we're producing.
And so we basically have,
the highest counts are going,
the font size is between 20 and
100, based on the count.
So we're going to write this file out and
this is some of the syntax
we're going to write.
So we're going to go through
the first 100 words and
part of this is to get
the newlines right.
It's really just to sort of get this
file to look the way we want it to.
And grab the size and
then we're going to take the size and
because we have the range of the size.
The number of times this word was
mentioned, that's this, compared to,
we'll subtract from the lowest and
then we're going to divide between the
highest and lowest, and that's the range.
We're going to divide by the range, and
then we're going to multiply that number
times the big size plus the small size.
So it's going to go from
sort of zero to 80 plus 20.
And so it's going to be from 20 to 100.
Ultimately this goes from 20 to 100.
The largest one will be 100, the smallest
one will be 20 and they'll all spread out.
So if you look, the largest,
the most common word is 100 font.
This is the font we're trying to set and
71, 26, there's a lot low and
then 20 are the lowest,
the words that are very rare.
And then in this gword.html, we see that.
And so we see the big words, the medium
sized words, the sort of almost small
words, and then the really tiny words,
and that's how that works.
And I'll just take a real quick look.
This is not the html class, but
this is just code that I got from
the d3js word cloud example.
And all this I really just
took from their website.
Make it the cloud, make it the cloud,
where's this somewhere in here,
we're going to get the data.
Somewhere there's the data.
It's right here,
jword.gs is being included there and
then it's going to end up in
that variable called gword.
So somewhere in here,
it is looping though all of the words and
producing these little pictures.
So, we're not going to cover that.
So that is a simple way to
go through the data and
do a simple count and
then turned it into a word cloud.
And sometimes you might build this word
cloud not just to make a word cloud but
a visualization is often a way
to give you sanity on your data.
You might make a word cloud out of
people's email address and have
things stick out.
It's just a interesting way to again,
visualization sometimes is not just to
present something but for you to look at
your data and even debug the data, okay?
So up next, we're going to do
our biggest visualization.